Self-introduction of working on inbreeding theory for past three years.

Want to briefly explain the key concept behind inbreeding theory as
introduced by Parker (1979). Talk about the book itself being a good
one, and that it is hard to find, and contains some of Bill Hamilton's
excellent writing on fig wasps, which I used to study.

Outline, very casually, the kind of interaction being represented by
Parker (1979) -- inviting the reader to imagine a drawn out scenario of
focal individual encountering a relative (for the sake of argument,
assume a sibling); what to do? Natural selection will favour behaviour
that maximises the number of replica copies passed to offspring. In our
simple case, there are two things to consider: 1) there are replica
alleles in the potential mate, and 2) inbred offspring have lower
survival probability than outbred offspring. Tell the story from the
perspective of the focal individual -- then note how Parker (1979)
explained the maths, but this has become expressed more generally in
Parker (2006) and Kokko and Ots (2006) as the standard equation.

Walk through the isolation of *δ*. Then, verbally, explain what this
means -- one big insight that Parker (1979) provided was that inbreeding
could be evolutionarily adaptive; this was already well-known in the
context of self-fertilisation, but not widely appreciated among
behavioural ecologists (Kokko and Ots 2006; Szulkin et al. 2013).

Perhaps more interesting, Parker (1979) noted that reproductive
interactions between relatives are expected to be characterised by
sexual conflict (explain what this means) in a way that
self-fertilisation versus outcrossing is not. Explain why this conflict
arises, and that it links with other kinds of conflict, citing relevant
sources here. Hence, in a few pages of Parker (1979), we have two key
theoretical insights; inbreeding should sometimes be adaptive, and
reproductive interactions between relatives should lead to sexual
conflict.

Note how this work of Parker (1979) still remains less appreciated than
perhaps it should, but interesting theory has been developed from its
foundation. Kokko and Ots (2006) conceptualised the timing of
interactions. Puurtinen (2011) (brief note to optimal inbreeding), I
think, was the first to note subtely that females but not males could
prefer inbreeding (explain why). The other paper on dispersal also boils
down to Parker (1979), which was also expressed in a more general paper
on sexual conflict in Parker (2006). Perhaps mention Lehtonen and Kokko
(2015) and Waser, Austad, and Keane (1986), noting the costs. Then the
conceptual unification between inbreeding theory and parental investment
theory, and the model of population genetics.

Kokko, Hanna, and Indrek Ots. 2006. “When not to avoid inbreeding.”
*Evolution* 60 (3): 467–75.

Lehtonen, Jussi, and Hanna Kokko. 2015. “Why inclusive fitness can make
it adaptive to produce less fit extra-pair offspring.” *Proceedings of
the Royal Society B* 282: 20142716.

Parker, Geoff A. 1979. “Sexual selection and sexual conflict.” In
*Sexual Selection and Reproductive Competition in Insects*, edited by
Murray S Blum and Nancy A Blum, 123–66. New York: Academic Press, Inc.

———. 2006. “Sexual conflict over mating and fertilization: an overview.”
*Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B* 361 (1466): 235–59.
doi:[10.1098/rstb.2005.1785](https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2005.1785).

Puurtinen, Mikael. 2011. “Mate choice for optimal (k)inbreeding.”
*Evolution* 65 (5): 1501–5.
doi:[10.1111/j.1558-5646.2010.01217.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1558-5646.2010.01217.x).

Szulkin, Marta, Katie V Stopher, Josephine M Pemberton, and Jane M Reid.
2013. “Inbreeding avoidance, tolerance, or preference in animals?”
*Trends in Ecology & Evolution* 28 (4). Elsevier Ltd: 205–11.
doi:[10.1016/j.tree.2012.10.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2012.10.016).

Waser, Peter M, Steven N Austad, and Brian Keane. 1986. “When should
animals tolerate inbreeding?” *American Naturalist* 128 (4): 529–37.
